in the department that might have been known at that time?
Well, Koenig came then.
Carl Koenig?
K-O-E-N-I-G.
Yeah, right.
He just retired here lately.
Were there any kind of legendary teachers?
Yes.
Paul Weaver.
What was his specialty?
Paul Weaver had a bachelor's degree in geology and worked for Shell Oil and had been president of AAPG, the American Association of Petroleum Geologists.
And during World War I, he had
learned Russian on board the ship from Vancouver, Washington, to the east in that period of time.
He had a photographic memory.
But unlike a lot of people with photographic memories, he could use the data.
And so he was a pretty sharp fellow.
Were there some nicknames the students gave to the faculty for their teaching and so forth?
Well, I wasn't familiar with them.
Well, you know, like over in sociology, Dr. Dan, Dan Russell was Dr. Dan, the grade point man.
Oh.
In history, we had Screamin' Al Nelson and Notes Nance.
Okay.
Now, where was the department located physically and what building are buildings?
Still the same building that we're in right now.
And what kind of facilities did it have then in terms of labs?
Well, it's been remodeled since then.
They were pretty primitive.
And we didn't have air conditioning either.
And we were required to wear a shirt with a tie on it.
And nowadays, well, this is the way I teach nowadays.
Who was it that conveyed those rules to you?
How did they tell you?
The department had conveyed them.
And I don't know where they came from, but I think they came from the dean.
And this was in engineering.
So the dean, when you arrived, was Calhoun?
No.
We had an interim dean.
Oh, okay.
And then who became the first permanent dean?
Well, Calhoun was in place.
Okay.
Describe the reaction when Calhoun came.
What did people think of him as dean?
Well, he was innovative.
He wanted changes.
Did he want any changes relating to geology?
Not that I know of.
The main thing in geology then was ECPD, the engineering board that approves curriculum and approves your program.
And of course,
I think that probably they still go through that accreditation over in engineering.
But I remember we didn't like that when it came around.
You had a lot of paperwork to fill out and stuff.
And at that time, I think we only had three engineers in the department.
One was Parker, and Clay Seward was there.
He was in.
And incidentally, when I was first here, I found out that one at the bases
Over in France, when I was coming back home, Seward happened to be at the same base, except Seward was attached to the Air Corps as an artillery person, anti-aircraft, yes.
And of course, I asked Seward once,
Have you ever shot down a German plane and said no?
I had my crew aim at one, but we shot down our American plane that was following it.
This is why friendly fire that I don't get too concerned about.
How were you received into the department?
Was there any kind of
orientation to the department?
Nothing.
Or A&M?
How did you find out what your course is, what your work assignment was going to be?
Well, the head of the department told you what you were teaching.
And do you remember what your workload was in those early semesters?
Three courses.
Three per semester.
Yeah, and maybe a couple of labs, too.
When I was doing research for Lawrence Radiation Lab, and this was in the 60 to 63 period, at one time I was assigned three graduate courses and on payroll one third time.
Now, this was common around this university in those days, because if you were doing research, you were really penalized for doing it.
As you began, this is your first teaching assignment, is that right?
At A&M?
Yeah, boy.
What was it like to prepare those lectures that first year?
Describe your routine.
It took quite a while to do it.
I originally was from the North.
Remember Spokane?
You teach fast.
You speak faster.
I found out that I couldn't speak that fast because the students couldn't comprehend what I was talking about.
So the first semester, they had a rough time.
I covered probably twice as much material as I do now.
Did any of them come to talk to you about it?
In the Corps?
I don't think so.
See, the whole attitude has changed from when I was a student and they were a student.
Nowadays, if you get out of line, you might have their lawyer come visit you, see?
I haven't had that happen to me, but for instance, when I was in college,
At Washington State, they didn't have tenure.
They had it where you could come up towards the end of the semester, and the administration could give you what we called a pink slip, and you were gone right then.
So, I was in a class.
English literature had to be going into the final, and I thought I had aced the final.
I got an F. I later found out that everybody in the class got an F. And nobody went and complained.
Because that's one thing you didn't do in those days.
Did you have a big survey course?
What was the most basic course you started out teaching?
Well, I taught the beginning geology course for a lot of periods here.
And how big were the sections then?
Well, they were about 100 to 150.
The biggest section I probably taught was one that they talked over in Zachary, where I had 225 in the class.
And that's too many.
Now, the only way I handled that was I used what you call a buzz session.
I'd get halfway through
And the minute you start to feel unrest, you stop.
Said, now we'll have a bus session.
You can talk to your neighbor, to anybody else in here, but you can't ask me any questions.
I did, let's say, five minutes.
Then I'd go ahead, raise the board, put up some more outline on it, and then start again.
You could hear a pin drop then.
And, of course, that wasn't new with me.
I found that out when I was attending one of the director's meetings for those summer programs that I ran for NSF.
But it worked.
In those early semesters, was there a senior colleague that you turned to for advice?
Was there anybody that you turned to and say, hey, I've got a problem, what do I do next?
Who'd you get?
I don't remember that I did that.
You see, when I was a TA, I sometimes substituted class so that I was sort of familiar with what goes on.
Do you remember any Aggie pranks or jokes in those early years?
Any tricks that anybody tried to play on anybody?
Trying to think of who they did it with.
Somebody made a remark about something and they had a whole room full of chicken feathers the next morning.
Describe your teaching style.
What did you try to accomplish the first day, the first week in the course?
Well, I always have tried to tell them what's going to happen in the whole course and what we're going to cover as topics through the whole course.
But nowadays, in the courses I teach, it's only a two-hour lecture.
You have to cover a whole textbook.
It's a little difficult.
But I like people to be asked questions.
If they don't, you wonder what's wrong.
Because you can't, nobody can be that clear with what they're saying and presenting.
And you were available in your office after class for?
Oh, yes.
Still am.
Normally, when did you get to the campus?
What time of day in those early years?
Quarter to eight.
And then we eat till five.
Till five.
And where did you and your departmental friends, where did you all eat lunch?
I went home for lunch.
Okay.
And generally they went out for coffee in the morning.
Where?
Jones Drugstore, which used to be across by, it's now an Exxon station right next door.
It isn't the drugstore anymore.
I don't know what's there.
Are you talking about at the Southside, at Southgate?
Eastgate.
At Eastgate.
Oh, yeah.
Did students come by?
What was the most difficult, for a new teacher, what was the most difficult part for these students to understand?
One, that you weren't going to raise their grade upon their request that they couldn't get by with that grade.
Oh, no, I had some people even come out to my house and plead that they weren't going to be able to get into their junior year in the Corps unless I raised their grade to A. And I said, what do you want me to do, raise all the other people to A?
Why, sure.
Now, you didn't grade on the curve.
Yes, I graded on the curve.
Oh, you did?
But one of the reasons I did was I still do today.
I can't write a test that you can't get away without using a curve.
Because you know there's questions that are difficult and those that aren't.
And theoretically, if you use multiple choice questions,
There ought to be one that's absolutely wrong, two that are partially right and going to trick most people into it, and one that is right.
So, the A&M student described their general attitudes then.
Well, let me say back then, the student was very provincial.
You went to class and asked how many people had ever been out of state, you would maybe have one hand or maybe no come up.
Nowadays, everybody's hand will be up.
They've all been out of state.
So they have—I think they have a different outlook.
Were they respectful?
Were they polite?
They were when they were in the Corps, yes.
Now, they didn't have to be in the Corps of the third and fourth year then.
Did you have many civilian students from the junior and senior?
No.
So most all of them?
And, well, see, we used to have a problem, too, with people in the Corps on field camp.
Field camp was required, and it's between the junior and senior year.
And the department head's attitude was, well,
You either take the field camp or you're—they always wanted some way to get out of taking it because they had to go to the ROTC camp that summer.
And the attitude of the department is, well, you're either going to want to be a general or be a geologist.
You're going to have to make a choice.
about how many chose to be a general instead?
What percentage?
Do you remember?
No, I don't know what percent.
I do know that here, oh, he graduated before I got here.
But it was about 10 years, maybe 15 years ago, that we had a three-star Air Force.
that had graduated in geology from A&M come back to make a visit.
So I do know that in the 8th Air Force, there was only one Aggie Brigadier General that I knew of.
Of course, I didn't know I was going to be an Aggie back then.
Where was field camp held in the 50s?
It was held at Junction.
At Junction?
Yeah.
They generally made a trip for about three or four days out to Alpine.
Did you ever go out there?
Yes.
Describe what field camp was like then.
Well, have you ever been to Junction in those days?
You know, you had those tent things and the faculty that was staying out there
All stayed in one tent.
And I thought that situation was a good one because it was set up so that a beginning freshman could come out there.
It wouldn't normally not be accepted at Texas A&M and find out whether he can hack it.
And so I thought they did a good job.
About how many geology students went to field camp per summer?
Oh, we'd have about 20 out there.
And they would have, this would be between their junior, sophomore and junior?
No, junior and senior.
Junior and senior.
Yeah.
And these were geology majors.
Right.
And y'all were busy with them all day, six days a week or five?
Six days out there.
And it was...
My gosh, some of the times we ran seven.
And how many weeks?
Ran for six weeks.
Six weeks.
And did they go into town much on the weekend, or did they stay out at camp?
There wasn't much injunction to go into.
Do you remember any pranks or jokes out there?
No, but I was taking shots—diftheria, I think I was taking—because there was the thought that we had run a field trip to Mexico after that summer term was over.
And all I know is, whatever those shots were, I got sick as a dog.
So they had to even call the doctor out after, because I had a reaction to the shot.
So, no, I remember that very well.
Curley was— Austin Curley.
It was out there.
K-E-R-L-E-Y.
But that was a good setup, and eventually the geology department built a seismic station out there.
And our senator got outmaneuvered when that got transferred to Texas Tech.
As you look back on it, was that program there, the field camp, was that well done, you think?
Oh, yes.
One of the problems is you have to be able to see things in the third dimension.
You can't just normally see them without drawing them out.
You're in trouble.
And there's a lot of geologists that are not good people in terms of mapping, in terms of
looking at that third dimension when they see the surface.
What did you and your faculty colleagues do when you had any spare time?
What did y'all do to relax in the summers out there?
Well, I always had reading material with me.
Incidentally, I'm a great reader anyway.
I've always been.
See, unfortunately for me in high school, I was able to get all
my homework done in the study periods that we had in school.
And so I always took home library books.
So I made more library books than you can shake a stick at.
And so I've always done a lot of reading.
I still— And what were your favorite topics for reading?
Well, one fellow I read about was Steinmetz, who made General Electric what it was, although he wasn't a businessman.
So, more history than fiction?
Yeah, more history than fiction.
Now, out there, if you wanted to go into Junction on Saturday night, was there a movie available?
What could you?
I don't know.
All I know is that the geology department had vehicles out there, and so did civil engineering.
They ran a summer camp out there, too.
But you wouldn't want to take a state vehicle in to drink beer.
Well, that's right.
Let's come back to
the town, describe what it was like for you and your wife to settle in here to join this community.
What was it like to be a newcomer in College Station in the mid-'50s?
Well, it was, we were in the middle of drought here too, so everything was dry.
Nowadays, the university does a lot of sprinkling of their lawns, but in those days, they didn't.
And we stayed in a motel, not a very top-rate one, because we didn't know how long we were going to be there, and then started to look for rental property, and we were looking in the paper.
And a gentleman, when we were starting to pull up from one way, honked a horn and stopped us, said, are you looking for a place to rent?
Yes.
I said, I'm coming here to teach in Texas A&M.
And he says, well, I have a place that's just come up empty, and I'd like you to look at it.
He was a fellow, the name was Brown.
and was the Brown of Brown and Allen, which Allen eventually took over completely when Brown retired.
Do you remember what the rent was on that first apartment?
No, no, I sure don't.
Where was it?
It's right where
on Cooner Street, and the bank that's in there, that property was taken over by the bank, so that no house there anymore.
And how did the neighborhood, how did the other departmental families receive a newcomer?
Was there anything to help you all become... No, no general thing, but the thing is that most people were pretty friendly anyway.
See, there was another new fellow about, Daylinger, came in about the same time, Peter Daylinger.
And as far as... We got together occasionally.
As far as you could tell...
Was the cost of living and groceries and everything else here, was it different than what you had known, where you moved from, or not?
Well, let's put it this way.
This was a very friendly place in those days.
Oh, good.
Good.
And you had no problems.
I'd say the cost of living was probably lower than it was in... See, I came here from Miami, Florida, and...
Cost of living was probably lower here.
And the summer heat seemed more oppressive here?
It's always been oppressive, but nowadays we have air conditioning.
I would rather tolerate the heat than the cold.
I would too.
I never did like snow, and one of the last years I was in Pullman, Washington,
It never got above freezing for about three months.
The accumulation of snow that winter was about three foot.
And I don't like snow.
So I'd rather tolerate heat.
Describe the campus then.
What was the A&M campus like?
Well, being a groundwater geologist, one of the things I noticed that there were some old pump houses here.
We were not using the water.
However, somebody asked me, oh, about—it's about 20 years ago.
I'm drilling a well, and there is a well
that is next to the geology building when the petroleum engineering building was built there.
It goes down about 200 feet to tap that same aquifer.
But they abandoned that and used a well field out at the old airfield because that water was terrible.
Well, it was slightly salty.
and high in hydrogen sulfide.
That's the campus well.
Campus wells.
So you had to hold your nose to drink it.
But I guess if you're in the car and that's all you got to drink, that's what you'll drink.
But they weren't being used.
They hadn't eliminated the well houses yet when I got here.
But in terms of appearance, what did, other than being brown and the grass dry, what did the campus look like?
Was it attractive?
Were there trees?
Now, there are some people that are architecturally highly critical of our campus, because we have a diverse set of buildings.
It certainly wasn't as built up as it is now.
The chemistry building has been added onto, and of course, so has the
The geology, used to be geology, petroleum engineering.
It's been added on to on the back.
And when I first came here, you got a parking spot signed to it.
You didn't have to pay for it.
And— Did you lock your car even then?
No, I do now.
But you didn't then.
I didn't lock my house when I first arrived here.
I do now.
What kind of office were you given that first year?
I shared it with a fellow that left the next year for Occidental.
And then the next year after that I shared it with King.
And did you all lock the office?
Oh, yeah.
You did?
Okay.
I did because I had tests.
Ah, yes.
When did, in the 1950s, there was a brief period when the Corps was optional for a year or two.
And then it went back to being compulsory.
Do you remember that making any difference?
No, I don't remember that period.
See, when I went through college, I went to Washington State, which is an A&M.
A land grant.
In those days, they all had ROTC.
And it was at my university, the first two years were compulsory.
Well, I couldn't qualify the other three if I'd wanted to do it.
In the late 50s, Mr. Rutter came over as the new president.
Do you remember any talk about that?
Was there any reaction among you and your colleagues to his selection?
Well, I think the reaction in the beginning
was how can somebody that hasn't been in academia run academia?
Turned out he could.
But what most people forgot was that he had a public office where he was working with problems that were pretty diverse.
Do you remember when you and your colleagues first heard him speak or saw him?
Any discussion, any recollections of that?
No, but I do remember when Zachary made a speech to us that they had us there for a dinner, the only faculty for your regents dinner that's been held.
And I remember Zachary talking to us.
We were employees.
When he got through speaking, there wasn't a single clap.
Why, do you remember that too?
That was in Cebiza, wasn't it?
Cebiza, yes.
And I vowed then I'd never go to another one.